---
layout: post
title: Phony&#58;&nbsp;Phone&nbsp;Numbers
categories:
  - ruby
  - phony
  - e164
---
This is a post about "Phony":http://florianhanke.com/phony/.

h2. Intro

Imagine…

You own a little startup, which has created apps that were only relevant for the domestic market. Until now.

Suddenly, the big breakthrough – your online car/music/housing/pet/houseboatlover's website has been an overnight (5+ yrs) success, and people demand it be available all over the world, including customers from all over the world.

Coding goes very well, until suddenly one of your customers notices that their phone number is all awry. Instead of the melodious french 2-digit grouping @33 1 12 34 56 78@, it is a horrible jumble of north american clumping: @3 (311) 234-5678@. This is an outrage! Sacrebleu!

France invades the US on the very next day. Freedom fries are forbidden and … well, you know how the story goes.

This could all have been avoided if you had used "Phony":http://florianhanke.com/phony/.

h2. The problem

The big problem is that countries all over the world have different ways of splitting and formatting their phone numbers.

For example, Switzerland uses a 2-digit national destination code, like @+41 44 123 12 12@ – the @44@ is the national destination code, which originally was geographic in nature, but isn't anymore.

Germany is different in that it has a variable length NDC, from 1 to 5, for example Freiburg im Breisgau uses 3: @+49 761 476 7676@, and Berlin uses 2: @+49 30 386 25454@.

Denmark on the other hand has no NDC at all. And let's not talk about Italy. No, let's not.

You see? Big mess.

Well, there is some standardization called "E164":http://florianhanke.com/phony/e164.html, and I'll talk about it below. But first, Phony.

h2. Phony

Phony does the ugly and dirty work of correctly formatting international phone numbers for you.

It can format, split, and normalize:
* Austria: @Phony.formatted('43198110', :format => :international, :spaces => :-) # => '+43-1-98110'@
* France: @Phony.split('33112345678') # => ['33', '1', '12','34','56','78']@
* North America: @Phony.normalize('1 (703) 451-5115') # => '17034515115'@

And it does it very fast. Each of these ops for 5 numbers is "around 1 10'000th of a second":http://github.com/floere/phony/blob/master/spec/lib/phony_spec.rb#L178-215 on my MBP using Ruby 1.9.2.

Normalizing you use before saving a phone number into a database etc.

Splitting is helpful if you want to do your own special formatting, or remove certain parts.

Although that is probably not needed, as Phony can take care of that for you: Formatting render a number in international/national/local form, with zeroes, @00@, plus @+@
and special spaces, if you need them (@" "@ is default).

Look at "a few more examples":http://florianhanke.com/phony/examples.html.

My country is not formatted correctly! What do I do?

h2. Internal API

Sometimes I have a nice document to go on, most of the time I don't, and not even in any of the languages or writing systems I know. Sometimes I simply made a mistake. This is where you can help Phony!

To add your "missing" country, fork Phony and look at the "lib/countries.rb file":http://github.com/floere/phony/blob/master/lib/countries.rb. It contains (almost) all the definitions. The more complicated ones – like Germany, Italy, etc. – are in their own files.

The internal API uses a little DSL to make managing and coding all the different formats easier.

The phone numbers of France, for example, have a very elegant structure:
@country '33', fixed(1) >> split(2,2,2,2)@

This says, that the country with country code @33@ should have an NDC of @fixed@ length @1@,
followed (@>>@) by a national code that is @split@ in groups of @2@.

As another quick example, the freshly added Slovakia:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>country '421', match(/^(9\d\d).+$/) >> split(6) | # Mobile
               one_of('2')          >> split(8) | # Bratislava
               fixed(2)             >> split(7)</code></pre>

This says that Slovakia uses @421@ as country code. If a phone number with NDC @9xx@ is found, @split@ the national part into one big part with @6@
digits. If not, go and check if the NDC is a @2@, if yes, @split@ it into a thing with @8@ digits as national. If not, it must be a 2-digit NDC, with 7 digits following.

So:
* @421912123456 # => 421 912 123456@
* @421212345678 # => 421 2 12345678@
* @421371234567 # => 421 37 1234567@

The description of what is available is at the top of the file.

First, add specs with a few example numbers, then fix, and send me a pull request. Get big thanks in "the contributors entries":http://github.com/floere/phony/wiki/Contributors. Try to beat Keith Bingman! :)

But let's get back to phone numbers.

h2. E.164

Or E164 for short is a recommendation which defines a numbering scheme and phone number formats. The "Wikipedia entry":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.164 is very helpful.

For coders, there are 2 important facts to be gleamed:
* Length is maximally = 15.
* Country code is a 1-3 digits "prefix code":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prefix_code. This is defined in E164. After that it is a horrible mess.

So, in e.g. ActiveRecord you can exploit fact #1 like this:
@t.string "normalized_phone", :limit => 15@

Fact #2 is harder to exploit, and this is what Phony is here for.

Btw, if you have customers who want to enter specific phone numbers, you could code it up like this in ActiveRecord:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>def phone
  read_attribute(:specific_phone) || read_attribute(:normalized_phone)
end</code></pre>

And before saving, you could normalize it quickly if it is dirty, to see if it needs to be saved in the specific_phone attribute. This just off the top of my head.

h2. Status

At the time of this writing, we include 44 countries, and counting. See "the README":http://github.com/floere/phony/blob/master/README.textile for a list.

h2. Endnote 1

Q: Why are this dude's libraries named after negative attributes?

A: No.

h2. Endnote 2

If I've found out just one thing about phone numbers then it is this formula:

@1 / (standardization + well-oiled-bureaucracy) = phone-number-structure-mess-quantifier@

Switzerland has a well oiled bureaucracy, 1, but not a big drive for standardization, 0, = 1.

France does not have a well oiled bureaucracy, 0, but a big drive for standardization, 1, = 1.

For Italy, the result is around 1.825x10e7. Booo.

A special thank you goes to Belgium which uses 4xx as its mobile phone prefix, but has a region, Liège, which uses 4 as its land line prefix. Belgium, do you know what a bloody prefix code is? OTOH, this led me to rewrite Phony a second time, and all is much better.

h2. Conclusion

So we've seen
# that Phony can normalize a phone number.
# that Phony can split a phone number into its constituent parts.
# that Phony can format a phone number for you.
# that it does all this very fast.
# what E164 is.
# what the status is.
# that some countries ARE better than others ;)

Hope you learnt something new!