---
layout: post
title: Picky 2.0
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
  - gems
---
In my previous post, I talked about what bothers me in Picky's API, and did a few 2.0 prerelease versions with the improvements.

After quite a bit of feedback, Picky 2.0 is released! :)

So, what's in it for you and what do you need to change in your 1.x version to use the spankingly new gem?

h2. What has changed?

Only three things. 2.0's change list is short but sweet.

h3. Query::Full/Live -> Search

The double definitions, @Query::Full@ and @Query::Live@ are no more. Good riddance!

Instead, you simply use @Search@. So instead of

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>class MyBeooootifulPickySearch < Application

  route %r{^/books/full} => Query::Full.new(some_index),
        %r{^/books/live} => Query::Live.new(some_index)

end</code></pre>

you use

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>class MyBeooootifulPickySearch < Application

  route %r{^/books} => Search.new(some_index)

end</code></pre>

It says "Route this URL to that search with these indexes and options".
Much more understandable and sexier! :)

To discern whether it is a full (with result ids) or live (without result ids) search, you pass e.g. curl an @ids@ query parameter:

<pre class="sh_bash"><code>$ curl 'localhost:8080/books?query=meow&ids=15&offset=0'</code></pre>

Defaults are 20 @ids@ and @0@ offset.

h3. Similarity::Phonetic -> Similarity::DoubleMetaphone

We've renamed @Similarity::Phonetic@ to @Similarity::DoubleMetaphone@. It's still the same algorithm. See "the double metaphone":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaphone#Double_Metaphone.

Also, we've added two default implementations, @Similarity::Metaphone@ and @Similarity::Soundex@ for your similarity pleasure :)

Since Picky is normally used by programmers, @DoubleMetaphone@ is much clearer for what it actually does.

Picky will tell you if you still use the old @Phonetic@ definition in your @app/application.rb@, so you don't need to learn this by heart.

h3. Picky::Client::Full/Live (in a client) -> Picky::Client

The Picky client in your application needs a few changes. Only a single client is needed anymore. So instead of

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>FullBooksSearch = Picky::Client::Full.new ...
LiveBooksSearch = Picky::Client::Live.new ...</code></pre>

you use

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>BooksSearch = Picky::Client.new ...</code></pre>

Then in your e.g. controller actions passing what amount of ids you need

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>BooksSearch.search params[:query], :ids => params[:ids], :offset => params[:offset]</code></pre>

or directly, using @:ids => 20@ or however you like it.

h3. Various

Leading up to 2.0, we've removed the hashbangs in the JS client history, added @rake stats@ and @rake analyze@. See more in the repo's top level @history.textile@.

h2. Conclusion

So we've seen
# that Picky is two-dot-oh-soooome!
# what you'd need to change to be 2.0 compatible.

Hope you learnt something new :)

Comments and feedback, as usual, are appreciated.