---
layout: post
title: Picky&nbsp;Case&nbsp;Study&#58;&nbsp;Restricting&nbsp;Results
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
  - "case study"
---
This is a post in the "Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/ series on its workings.

h2. Intro

Recently a Picky user contacted me with an intriguing question.
*Items have restricted visibility*. Some items can only be seen by Mr. Black (user id 5), but others only by Mr. Pink (user id 42). All items can each only be seen by a small number of users.

The question: "How can we do it?"

It turns out, Picky can do this already quite easily.

h2. Here goes

Let's say we have items that have a method @#restricted_to_user_ids@ that returns an array of user ids which can "see" this item in results:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>class Item
 attr_reader :id # e.g. 42
 attr_reader :name # e.g. "Dan"
 attr_reader :restricted_to_user_ids # e.g. [2,3,5,7,11]
end</code></pre>

Quite nice.

But how can we ask Picky to just return results that the current user can see?

Since Picky is good at filtering, we could prefix each query by, say,

@restricted:5@

which would create queries like

@restricted:5 my cool query@

(how we do this we'll see later). This means we'd only search for items which have 5 in their restricted user ids list.

Now. Since Picky cannot yet directly index the array returned by @#restricted_to_user_ids@, we have to use a technique, which in german would be called "_from behind through the breast into the eye_":

We create a reader, which simply joins the array from @#restricted_to_user_ids@ into a string with space-separated user id values.

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>class Item
 attr_reader :id # e.g. 42
 attr_reader :name # e.g. "Dan"
 attr_reader :restricted_to_user_ids # e.g. [2,3,5,7,11]
 def restricted
   restricted_to_user_ids.join(' ') # e.g. "2 3 5 7 11"
 end
end</code></pre>

Assuming we split the data on spaces, Picky indexes the ids nicely for each item.

Then, all we have to do is add the category @:restricted@ (which uses the reader we just defined) to the index.

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>items = Picky::Index.new :items do
 source { Item.order('name DESC') }
 indexing splits_text_on: /\s/
 category :name
 category :restricted
end</code></pre>

h2. The JS frontend

Finally, to add the @restricted:<user_id>@ text in front of each query, we use the Javascript callback available in the generated client, @before@. Since version 3.1.2, before gets the query and the params.

Whatever you return is used as the new query.

<pre class="sh_javascript"><code>before: function(query, params) { return query.replace(/^/, 'restricted:' + user_id + ' ') }</code></pre>

This code replaces @"my beautiful query" => "restricted:5 my beautiful query"@ (Please note that the JS function @#replace@ leaves the original string alone).

h2. One little problem

Did you notice? There's one little problem with solving it in JavaScript.

If the visibility restriction is not crucial, but only helpful to your users, we would be finished.

However, if Mr. Pink cannot ever see results that only Mr. Black should have access to, we'd now have a big problem.

h2. The solution?

The solution is to route the full and live requests through our web server, and adding the @restricted:<user_id>@ there. So in the server you'd prepend your query with @"restricted:#{current_user.id} #{params[:query]}"@ and send it off to the Picky server.

And that's it already. Nobody loses an ear. Quite easy, don't you think?