---
layout: post
title: Picky&nbsp;4.0
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
---
"Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/ 4.0 release - a quick description of the goals and the changes from version 3.6.16.

h2. Goals

The ultimate goal of Picky is to become *THE* choice for a *lightweight* search engine, as *flexible* as possible, regarding the container on one hand (useable in a script/a "Sinatra":http://sinatrarb.com instance, a DRb server, wherever) and in itself on the other hand, offering a rich "API":https://github.com/floere/picky/blob/master/server/APIs.textile where you plug in search engine behavior.

Release 4.0 is another big step towards these goals.

h2. Changes (tl;dr)

The one big change is that both the classic Picky application and classic Picky sources have been removed. If you need these, please continue using 3.6.16.

If you want to jump on 4.0, replace with a Sinatra app and convert your source into one that responds to @#each@ (See the Wiki on sources).

Other important changes:

* @Picky::Index@, option @weights@ has been renamed to @weight@.
* @Picky::Indexes.reload@ => @Picky::Indexes.load@, analog on @Index@, @Category@.
* If you call any @define_*@ methods, please remove the @define_@ part.
* If you defined a @source { with a block }@, the block is now evaluated each time the indexer runs on a category.
* Rake task @rake index:parallel@ is used by @rake index@. If you can't index in multiple processes, please use @rake index:serial@.

h2. Detailed Changes

This is for users that are currently on version 3.6.x. Extracted from the "history.textile":https://github.com/floere/picky/blob/master/history.textile file:

* hanke: (server) BREAKING @Picky::Indexes.index@ does not index in parallel anymore.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Renamed @Picky::Indexes.index_for_tests@ to @Picky::Indexes.index@.
* hanke: (server) If you want to explicitly run parallel indexing programmatically, use @Picky::Indexes.index Picky::Scheduler.new(parallel: true)@ or @Picky::Indexes[:index_name].index Picky::Scheduler.new(parallel: true)@.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Renamed @Picky::Wrappers::Category::ExactFirst@ to @Picky::Results::ExactFirst@. Extend instead of wrap: @index.extend Results::ExactFirst@ or @category.extend Results::ExactFirst@. If an index is extended, each category of the index will be extended.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING @Picky::Indexes.reload@ has been renamed to @Picky::Indexes.load@.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING @index.reload@ has been renamed to @index.load@.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING @category.reload@ has been renamed to @category.load@.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Removed all @define_...@ methods on indexes.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Removed Picky classic application. Please use Picky e.g. in a Sinatra app.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Removed Picky classic sources. Please use a source with the #each method.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Option @weights@ for the @Picky::Index#category@ method has been renamed @weight@ to conform with the other methods.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Picky does not require the text gem anymore by default. Only when you use phonetic similarity. It will tell you what it needs.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Added the PICKY_ENVIRONMENT in front of the Redis key namespace to differentiate the various environments.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Removed @rake routes@ since only the classic server was able to provide it.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Removed the classic server from the generators.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Reverting customizeable backends from version 3.3.2. They are no longer available. Please use simple subclassing to achieve funky backends.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING SQLite @self_indexed@ and Redis @immediate@ option is now called @realtime@, as changes go directly through to the actual backends, in "realtime".
* hanke: (server) BREAKING The @tokenizer@ option for a category has been renamed to @indexing@, to conform with the methods for the index and the sinatra app.
* hanke: (server) BREAKING Internal @Similarity#encoded@ method has been renamed to @#encode@.
* hanke: (statistics) Overhauled statistics interface. Use @picky statistics log/search.log@ to start it.
* hanke: (server) The @Index#source@ block is now evaluated every time an indexer runs.
* hanke: (server) Explicitly uses @Yajl::Encoder#encode@ for JSON encoding.
* hanke: (server) Fixed cases where even when no similarity was defined on a category, similar results were still found.
* hanke: (server) Rake task @index@ now points to task @index:parallel@ by default. Call @rake:serial@ to index serially.
* hanke: (server) Indexer calls @reconnect!@ on sources that support it.
* hanke: (server) Location/Volumetric/Geosearch rewritten.
* hanke: (generators) Fixed integration specs for the generated "all in one" server/client.
* hanke: (generators) Changed method calls to adapt to above changes.
* hanke: (server) Using the @procrastinate@ gem to parallelize indexing.
* hanke: (server) Indexing call structure cleaned up. Improves performance by about 40%.