---
layout: post
title: Migrating&nbsp;to&nbsp;Picky&nbsp;3.1&nbsp;(from&nbsp;3.0)
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
---
This post is intended for "Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/ users that are at version 3.0 (or near) and would like to move to version 3.1.

h2. Picky 3.1 is released!

You're probably wondering: The last post handled upgrading to 3.0, why is there another update so close to it?

First of all, let me say sorry for the quick succession of upgrades. Picky will help you and tell you what to do, as good as it can.

Secondly, Picky's goal is to be very *modular* and have *exchangeable modules*, while *not being more complicated* to read or use.

What does this have to do with this update?

h2. What has changed?

Instead of defining your memory/redis indexes like so

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>memory_index = Picky::Indexes::Memory.new :name do
  # definition
end

redis_index = Picky::Indexes::Redis.new :name do
  # definition
end</code></pre>

you now only use @Picky::Index.new@ and pass in the appropriate index backend. Since the memory backend is the default, you don't need to pass it in. For the Redis backend, you use @Picky::Backends::Redis.new@:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>memory_index = Picky::Index.new :name do
  # definition
end

redis_index = Picky::Index.new :name do
  backend Picky::Backends::Redis.new
  # definition
end</code></pre>

Two reasons:
* Exchangeable backends
* Inheritance is overrated

h2. Double Index. What does it meeeean?

This means that from now on you can pass in your own backend!

We would be quite happy if someone decided to do a purely file-based backend :) Got one? Please contribute!
(As an example, see "http://github.com/floere/picky/blob/master/server/lib/picky/backends/redis.rb":http://github.com/floere/picky/blob/master/server/lib/picky/backends/redis.rb, explanations will follow. Stay tuned!)

This is the main API change in 3.1.

h2. ちわ, WaDoku!

In other news, Picky now can index and search Japanese.
(Mainly due to "this project":http://wadoku.eu/ and the combined efforts of "Roger Braun":http://twitter.com/rogerbraun and "Brian Lopez":http://twitter.com/brianmario)

Thanks for reading and have fun! さよなら!!!