---
layout: post
title: Searching with Picky&#58; In&nbsp;the&nbsp;Terminal
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
  - gems
---
This is a post in the "Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/index.html series on its workings. If you haven't tried it yet, do so in the "Getting Started":http://florianhanke.com/picky/getting_started.html section. It's quick and painless :)

This post is about a fun little experimental toy I've been working on: @rake search <url>@.

h2. rake search &lt;url&gt;?

Yes. While working on a server, I sometimes want to see if the search engine works correctly directly in the terminal (normally I use tests, but sometimes I need that quick look).

h2. How do I use it?

See this short video (it's best to full-screen it):

<iframe src="http://player.vimeo.com/video/22216442" width="600" height="387" frameborder="0"></iframe>

# Start a Picky server.
# Then type @rake search /some/url@ (where @/some/url@ is a path – or url if not on this server – you've defined using @route@ in @app/application.rb@).
# Then, just type away.

The result id count will update as you type.

When pressing enter, the top 20 result ids will appear next to your search text.

If you want to exit, just @Ctrl-C@. That's it.

Note that you need the picky-client & highline gem installed. But Picky will tell you so if you haven't.

h2. How does it work?

I use the highline gem (by "@JEG2":http://twitter.com/jeg2) to get single characters (using the appropriately named @get_character@) from the user and then move the cursor around using @\e[#{amount}D@ (left) and @\e[#{amount}C@ (right), @print@ ing to the STDOUT and @flush@ ing it a lot.

If there is a gem which makes it easy to position objects in the terminal which update it (by being used in a visitor pattern or however), I'd like to hear about it!

h2. Note

Since this is experimental, it might not remain at @rake search@. I might move it to @picky search@ since it doesn't actually need to be run from the project it is searching on (and simply accesses an URL).

h2. Conclusion

So we've seen
# how you run a search directly in the terminal.

Hope you learnt something new!