---
layout: post
title: Searching with Picky&#58; Partial Search
categories:
  - series
  - ruby
  - picky
---
This is a post in the "Picky":http://floere.github.com/picky/index.html series on its configuration. If you haven't tried it yet, do so in the "Getting Started":http://floere.github.com/picky/getting_started.html section. It's quick and painless :)

h2. What is a Partial Search?

Partial searching is when the user only enters part of a query word, but the search engine still manages to find the whole word.

Example:
We want to find all @chunky bacon@. If the search engine supports a partial search, we should be able to search for just @chunky ba@ and @chunky bacon@ will still be found.

Note that @chunky bards@ will also be found, and so will @chunky babes@. So beware.

Usually, the character used for partial searches is the asterisk, @*@.
So you would search for @chunky ba*@ to have the search engine look for @ba@ followed by anything.

h2. In Picky

At the time of writing, Picky offers a postfix partial search, meaning that only words _ending_ in anything can be searched. (Or a @Partial::None@ partial search that just ignores the @*@.)

The thing you use is @Partial::Substring@, like this:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>some_index = index :main, Sources::DB.new('SELECT id, title FROM books', file: 'app/db.yml')
some_index.define_category :title, partial: Partial::Substring.new(from: 1)</code></pre>

So you define a data category on the index and give it the @partial@ option. With this option you tell Picky to use the following class for generating the index in a special way to support partial indexing and querying.

What we want in the example above is have Picky use a @Partial::Substring@, and have a query word match @from@ the first position (position @1@).

Example:
A word like @picky@ would match on @p@, @pi@, @pic@, @pick@ and @picky@. If you defined @from: 3@, then it would only match @pic@, @pick@, @picky@. Setting @from@ to @1@ is indexing intensive, but will find everything.

It is super-easy to write your own partial search. See below for that. The sky is the limit, basically.

On a side-note: Picky will always search the last word of a query with a @*@, except if you use double quotes, like so: @"chunky bac"@. This will really only find @chunky bac@, not @chunky bacon@.

h2. How does Picky do this?

Picky aims to be very extensible, so what it does is very simple.

Picky uses a partial generator, like @Partial::Substring@ which takes an exact index (more below) and returns a partial index.

An exact index in Picky is just a hash that maps words to an array of ids.

So @Partial::Substring.new(from: 3)@ takes something like that:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>{
  :picky => [1, 16, 3, 999],
  :pickle => [800, 3, 55]
}
</code></pre>
(the index for exact matches) and transforms it into something like that:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>{
  :pickle => [800, 3, 55],
  :pickl  => [800, 3, 55],
  :picky => [1, 16, 3, 999],
  :pick  => [1, 16, 3, 999, 800, 3, 55],
  :pic  => [1, 16, 3, 999, 800, 3, 55]
}
</code></pre>
So in @pic@, there are both the ids from @picky@ and the ids from @pickle@. If someone looks for @pic@, we return a mix of both ids.

h2. How do I define my own Partial Search?

It is extremely simple. A partial search just needs to implement a @generate_from(exact_index)@ method that returns the new partial index.

You could for example implement a partial index that has _random_ substring matches of up to 3 characters (silly, I know :)):
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>class Partial::Random
  def generate_from exact_index
    exact_index.inject({}) do |partial_index, word_and_ids|
      word, ids = *word_and_ids
      start  = rand word.size
      ending = rand(3) + 1
      random_substring = word[start, ending]
      partial_index[random_substring] ||= []
      partial_index[random_substring] += ids
      partial_index
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>
This method returns a new index that might look like this:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>Partial::Random.new.generate_from(:picky => [1,2,3]) # => { :ick => [1,2,3] }
</code></pre>
Of course, the example is not very performant – but legible for you.

Finally, you'd use it for your data categories like this:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>some_index = index :main, Sources::DB.new('SELECT id, title FROM books', file: 'app/db.yml')
some_index.define_category :title, partial: Partial::Random.new
</code></pre>

A better idea might be to create a substring partial that generates a partial index where the asterisk is actually at the front of the word:
<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>{
  :picky => [1,2,3],
  :icky  => [1,2,3],
  :cky   => [1,2,3],
  :ky    => [1,2,3],
  :y     => [1,2,3]
}
</code></pre>
This will match @picky@ if you enter just a @y@!

Picky is very flexible – do what you want however you want it.

h2. Conclusion

So we've seen
# what a partial search is.
# how Picky does a partial search.
# how a partial search is configured in Picky.
# how you can write your own.

Hope you learnt something new :)

h2. Contributing one to Picky

If you write your own, please let me know!