---
layout: post
title: What I want for Picky 1 (Separation of HTTP and Multiprocessing)
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
---
Recently, I've been thinking about how I handle search requests in "Picky":http://floere.github.com/picky/.

h2. The Situation

What goes on currently is this:
I have a Unicorn master and Unicorn worker children.

When a HTTP Request arrives, a child is called to unwrap the HTTP specific stuff, then the child's Application#call method is called, which in turn calls a query's #search_with_text method which takes a query string and an offset.

The routing uses Joshua Peek's "rack-mount":http://github.com/josh/rack-mount, which is also used in Rails 3.

In Picky, you route queries like this:

<pre><code>route %r{\A/path/of/query\Z} => my_beautiful_query</code></pre>

This will route e.g. @localhost:8080/path/of/query?query=test@ to the query object @my_beautiful_query@, where #search_with_text will be called with the parameters "test" and an offset of 0 (the default).

h2. How I'd like it to be

Performance tests have shown that sometimes, a search in Picky is even faster than the HTTP overhead.

Also, since all full searches first go through a web app (to enrich the results), it doesn't necessarily make sense to use HTTP again from the web app to Picky.

What I'd like to offer the Picky users is not just a HTTP @route@ method, but also methods for TCP, or sockets.

<pre><code>map_tcp 3001 => my_other_beautiful_query</code></pre>

or

<pre><code>socket '/path/to/socket' => yet_another_beautiful_query</code></pre>

Note: Perhaps I use the @route@ method for all of them.

h2. The Problem

Unicorn only supports HTTP. That in itself would not be a problem.

The problem stems from the fact that
# the forking of worker children
# the HTTP parsing
are baked together, making my offering multiple interfaces impossible, or very hard.

"Unicorn":http://unicorn.bogomips.org/ is great, btw.

h2. So what I'd really like

I'd like to separate the HTTP handling and the forking of worker children.

What would be best:
# 1 master process
# N children with adapters for HTTP/TCP/Socket requests

Alternatively, each child only processes the HTTP/TCP/Socket requests and then passes on (to a Unix socket) a standardized message with the query text and an offset. Another child (or the same) would then perform the standardized search request.

So in short I'd like to be able to say: Start me a server with 10 children which map HTTP requests to that query, while full requests just use TCP since they come from a webserver.

h2. Outlook

The @Query#search_with_text@ interface is already defined.

What I will start working on is extracting the HTTP parsing from (probably) Mongrel. For multiprocessing, I could use "procrastinate":https://rubygems.org/gems/procrastinate. The thing that's yet missing is a buffering interprocess communication, which I might write myself, or use one of Kaspar Schiess' future IPC gems :)

So, a great future is ahead. I hope it all turns out as I'd like it.