---
layout: post
title: Searching with Picky&#58; Redis
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
  - gems
  - redis
---
This is a post in the "Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/index.html series on its workings. If you haven't tried it yet, do so in the "Getting Started":http://florianhanke.com/picky/getting_started.html section. It's quick and painless :)

This post will be a very short introduction on Redis index backends and Picky, and how to configure your indexes to run on Redis.

I intended to do a massive writeup, but since all you do is change 6 characters @Memory@ into 5 different characters @Redis@ it just seemed like a massive overkill.

I admit though that many massive writeups have been done on even smaller changes, like "1.8" -> "1.9" ;)

Ok, so what am I talking about?

h2. tl;dr

# "Redis":http://redis.io/ can now be used in Picky as an index backend.
# In your config, do @Index::Memory.new@ -> @Index::Redis.new@ and you're set :)
# Memory and Redis indexes cannot (yet) be mixed and matched.
# In 1.5.0, Picky uses Redis database 15.

h2. What is Redis?

Redis is – taken from the website – an "_open source, advanced key-value store_". But this is not all. It also is a "_data structure server_". Check it out "on its very nicely done website":http://redis.io/.

"But we already have the massively fast in-memory backend. Why Redis?", you scream, indignantly.

h2. Why Redis?

Granted, in-memory indexes in Picky are really fast. But they have a few drawbacks:
# Relatively slow search engine startup, as the JSON index files need to be loaded into memory. This is especially noticeable if the index is around 12 GB.
# To restart Unicorn without a hitch you need double the space the in-memory index needs, since Unicorn starts up a second master in parallel to the old one.
# They need to be reloaded to be updated (see last blog post).

I haven't had any problems with that, but I can see the problem. Hence, Redis.

h2. How do you use Redis indexes?

Looking at the configuration that the scaffolding generates, you see that it uses an @Index::Memory@ called books:

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>books_index = Index::Memory.new :books, Sources::CSV.new(:title, :author, file: 'app/library.csv')</code></pre>

If you'd like to use the Redis backend instead, you'll have to change @Memory@ into @Redis@.

<pre class="sh_ruby"><code>books_index = Index::Redis.new :books, Sources::CSV.new(:title, :author, file: 'app/library.csv')</code></pre>

I know. Picky is hard on the typing hand ;)

Uh. That's already it. Welcome Redis. Bye bye, Memory.

What you have to do now is re-index and start Picky:

<pre class="sh_bash"><code>$ rake index
... indexing output ...
$ rake start</code></pre>

Or, start Picky, re-index and search while it is indexing, to get some added fun value.

h2. What is the impact of Redis indexes?

Compared to the in-memory index, what are the advantages and disadvantages?

Advantages:

* Faster startup time, especially with a large index.
* Indexing as-you-search. (No index reloading)

Drawbacks:

* Factors slower.

h2. Caveats / Next Versions

The Redis backend implementation in Picky is not yet customizable. This means that:

# It uses Redis database 15.
# Returned entry ids are always strings, even when they were integers going in. You'll have to convert them back.
# Redis and Memory indexes cannot (yet) be mixed and matched. So this isn't possible: @Query::Full.new(redis_index, memory_index)@. Picky will notify you if you try to do so, so no worries.

I am focusing on these points in the upcoming 1.5.* versions.

h2. Outlook

One of the next blog posts will look at the performance differences between the Redis backend and the memory backend.

I can already reveal that the memory backend will be faster. Surprise! ;) The question is: Is Redis so much slower as to be unbearable?

_Music, pregnant with suspense, fills the room: Dun dun DUNNN._

h2. Conclusion

So we've seen
# what Redis is.
# that Picky offers two different index backends: In-Memory and Redis.
# how you use/implement the Redis index backend in your search.

Hope you learnt something new :)