---
layout: post
title: Picky&nbsp;Statistics&nbsp;Interface
categories:
  - ruby
  - picky
---
This is a post in the "Picky":http://florianhanke.com/picky/index.html series on its workings. If you haven't tried it yet, do so in the "Getting Started":http://florianhanke.com/picky/getting_started.html section. It's quick and painless :)

This post is about a fun statistics interface I've been working on, including a video. Download 4.5.2+, and enter this in your preferred shell.

<pre class="sh_shell"><code>picky stats path/to/log/file.log</code></pre>

This will tell you this:

<pre class="sh_shell"><code>Logfile path/to/log/file.log found.
Clam, Picky's friend, is looking at Picky's logfile
path/to/log/file.log
and showing results on port 4567.
== Sinatra/1.3.2 has taken the stage on 4567 for development with backup from Thin
>> Thin web server (v1.3.1 codename Triple Espresso)
>> Maximum connections set to 1024
>> Listening on 0.0.0.0:4567, CTRL+C to stop</code></pre>

Then, in another shell, enter

<pre class="sh_shell"><code>open localhost:4567</code></pre>

(on OSX) and have fun!.

h2. Video Demo

See this short video (it's best to full-screen it):

<iframe src="http://player.vimeo.com/video/45051903" width="600" height="387" frameborder="0"></iframe>

The interface uses this great JS lib: "http://square.github.com/crossfilter/":http://square.github.com/crossfilter/. Check it out :)

h2. Interface Usage Ideas

Slice and dice your data:

# What queries are slowest?
# Are they suspiciously slow in the morning?
# How many return more than 1 allocation?
# Does more allocations also mean slower? Or more results?

Etc.